# Bachelor-Thesis: Probabilistic Forecasting for Swiss Inflation

This project presents a comparative analysis of Machine Learning and Econometric models to forecast the entire probability distribution of Swiss CPI inflation. While traditional Swiss monetary policy often relies on point forecasts, this research addresses the need to capture tail risks and economic shocks (such as those seen during the pandemic and recent energy price swings) by utilizing distributional forecasting.

---
## Project-Overview

The primary goal is to evaluate how well different modeling approaches can estimate the full spread of risks for Swiss headline and core inflation. The study specifically compares the performance of Quantile Regression Forests (QRF) and Bayesian Vector Autoregressions (BVAR). We thereby, want to test the following working hypotheses:

- **H1:** QRF will outperform the BVAR in the short-term (1–6 months) due to its ability to handle non-linearity.
- **H2:** BVAR will show superior performance in the medium-term (6–12 months).
- **H3:** Core inflation will demonstrate more significant non-linear dynamics than headline inflation.

To achieve this, we set ourselves the following key objectives:
1. Implementation: Build and validate QRF and BVAR models tailored for Swiss macroeconomic data.
2. Accuracy Evaluation: Use the Continuous Ranked Probability Score (CRPS), coverage, and calibration tests to assess the precision of the predictive distributions.
3. Policy Insights: Provide actionable suggestions for the Swiss National Bank (SNB) on communicating economic uncertainty.

---
## Usage 

To run the models, navigate to the Code directory and execute the desired script via the terminal. For example, to run the BVAR model with a specific configuration:

```bash
cd Code
python Scripts/Models/bvar_model.py --config Configs/bvar_natural_niw.yaml
```


---
## Source Code Directory Tree
```bash
.
├── Code/
│   ├── Configs/         # Model configurations used for simulation studies
│   ├── Data/         # Raw and processed/cleaned data (see internal README for sources)
│   ├── Results/        # Direct model outputs used for subsequent comparisons
│   └── Scripts/
│       ├── Models/         #Core model implementations
│       ├── Plots_and_Tables/         #Visuals and tables generated by the main scripts
│       ├── Utils/      #Helper functions for model execution and result processing
│       ├── 01_data_ingestion.py
│       ├── 02_eda_raw.py
│       ├── 03_preprocessing.py
│       ├── 04_analysis_PCA.py
│       ├── 05_diagnostic_distribution_analysis.py
│       ├── 06a_calculate_mean_metrics.py
│       ├── 06b_Statistical_Tests.py
│       ├── 06c_visual_evaluation.py
│       └── 07_Comparison_SNB_Forecast.py
│       
├── Documents/      #PDF copies of official submissions
├── .gitignore             
├── LICENSE                 
└── README.md     
```
---
## Acknowledgements
Special thanks to Prof. Dr. Francesco Audrino for supervision and guidance.
